Bicycle – Bartosz Ciechanowski

Bartosz Ciechanowski

Blog

Patreon

X / Twitter

Instagram

e-mail

[date]

Bicycle

There is something delightful about riding a bicycle. Once mastered, the simple action of pedaling to move forward and turning the handlebars to steer makes bike riding an effortless activity. In the demonstration below, you can guide the rider with the slider , and you can also drag the view around to change the camera angle:

Compared to internal combustion engines or mechanical watches , bicycles are fairly simple machines – most of their parts operate in plain sight. What's not directly visible are all the forces that make it possible to ride and control a bicycle without compromising the structural integrity of its components.

In this article, I'll focus on the delicate interplay between many of the forces that act on a bicycle and its parts when riding. We'll witness how forces applied through tires make a bicycle accelerate, brake, and turn, and we'll also investigate how the wheels and the frame handle those different forces without breaking.

Before we understand these more complicated interactions, we'll play with much simpler objects. The basic scenarios we're about to explore will help us develop an intuition about the behavior of a real bicycle.

Forces

Let's introduce the unassuming protagonist of this section – a plain wooden box. In the demonstration below, you can use the slider to apply a force to this box. The little speedometer in the bottom part tracks the velocity of the crate. You can restart the simulation using the button:

The red arrow represents the pushing force, which could be applied by a hand, or a strong gust of air. The size of that arrow reflects the magnitude of that force – the bigger the arrow, the stronger the pushing action.

Notice that once the block is moving, it will continue to move with the same velocity even when you stop applying the force . In the magical world of these simulations I removed all friction or air resistance – the only forces present are the ones we see.

As you apply that force on the block, it increases its velocity – the bigger the force, the faster the acceleration. Moreover, for the same force, the bigger the mass of the box, the slower it will accelerate. You can experience this in the demonstration below, where the bigger box is twice as heavy as the smaller box, but the applied forces are the same:

While in this article I'll mostly avoid the underlying mathematical details, the relation tying the applied force F , the mass of the object m , and the output acceleration a of that object, deserves to be presented in one of the most fundamental equations in physics:

F = m &middot; a

Let's complicate things a little by adding a second force that is trying to push the box to the left. You can still control the magnitude of the right-pushing force with the slider, but to make our experiments a little easier, I'll restore that force to its original magnitude after you let go:

Notice, that it's not the mere presence of forces that causes an object to accelerate – the velocity changes only when these forces are not balanced . Recall that we're representing the magnitude of forces using arrows of different sizes, so as long as the length of the right-pointing arrow is equal to the length of the left-pointing arrow , the box won't change its velocity.

It's worth pointing out once more that when the box starts to move due to force imbalance, just letting the slider go to balance the two forces again will not stop the box – it will keep moving with some velocity. To slow the crate, we need to change the balance of forces to work against the current motion, and do it carefully enough to avoid overshooting.

Let's explore one more concept related to these simple forces. In the demonstration below, the box is resting against a wall and you can once more control the force pushing that box to the right:

Similarly to the previous examples, as we apply a force on the box we'd expect it to move, but it doesn't budge at all, which implies that there must be some other force acting on it to balance that pushing force . Let's visualize all the other forces present in this scenario:

Notice that as we push the box, that box pushes on the wall, but the wall pushes the box back, and it's that force that balances the pushing force , which keeps the box static. Let's draw the box and the wall separately to show the forces acting on each one:

The wall is firmly attached to the ground, so the force pushing on the wall is effectively trying to push the entire Earth. Since our planet is very heavy, the acceleration of the Earth and the wall attached to it is effectively non-existent.

You may wonder how the wall knows how much back-force to apply, so let's look at the interaction between these two objects up close and in slow motion. As we apply the force , the box actually starts accelerating into to the wall, pushing its surface to the right:

As the box moves to the right, it compresses the molecules in the wall, which create a spring-like force that pushes the box back. If that force is too small to balance the pushing force , the box will continue to move to the right, which compresses the wall even more, creating an even larger push-back force .

If that force grows too large and overpowers the pushing force , it will start to accelerate the box to the left, which will slow it down and even move it back to the left. This will then reduce the compression of the wall, which in turn decreases that resisting force . The entire system very quickly finds its balance, and since the wall and box are very stiff, the final displacement isn't perceptible.

In this next demonstration we're complicating things a little by applying an inclined force that's pushing the box into the corner:

As the box is not moving, the forces acting on it must be balanced, which we can see in the right side, where I've tallied up head-to-tail all the arrows representing the forces acting on the box to show that they form a closed loop. We can also decompose the angled pushing force into its horizontal and vertical components – these are balanced by the horizontal and vertical reaction forces from the wall.

Before we finish up with these simple forces, let's explore what happens when we line up two boxes next to each other and try to push the left one towards the wall:

As we push the first box, it pushes on the second box, which then pushes on the wall. Notice that the wall doesn't know that there are two boxes there, it just feels the effects of that single pushing force . The wall pushes back on that second box, which in turn pushes on the first box. To make things clearer, we could even separate the boxes and draw forces acting on each one, showing that both crates are in balance:

Although I've shown them explicitly here, there is nothing special about the two forces between the boxes. Equivalently, we could draw forces between every plank of wood in these crates – each plank pushes on its neighbor and is also pushed back by it. If we were to look closely enough, we could draw the arrows between the individual molecules constituting these boxes – they're all steadily kept in balance by the surrounding forces exerted by the neighboring particles.

In this article, I'll sometimes visualize these internal forces, as they will help us understand the behavior of individual bicycle components, but note that it's up to us to decide where we want to draw these artificial separating boundaries to expose the internal reactions.

The ideas we've explored in this section are collectively known as Newton's laws of motion , and they are fundamental for understanding how objects move and interact with each other when forces are applied. However, there is a little more we need to explore to understand the behavior of a bicycle.

Moments

You may have realized that the forces we've been applying to the boxes have been conspicuously pointing at the centers of those objects. Let's see what happens to this box when we exert a force that isn't so neatly aligned:

As you can see, the box still moves to the right, but it also starts to rotate and continues to rotate after the force disappears. Notice that I marked the box with a small black and white symbol that symbolizes the center of mass of this object.

I'm also drawing a dashed line through which the force operates. In this example, the line doesn't go through the box's center of mass, but it's placed at a distance from that center. This creates a lever arm through which the force rotates the object.

The further away that line is from the center of mass, the easier it is for the force to rotate the object. In the following demonstration, you can apply two forces of the same magnitude to two identical boxes. The only difference is the distance to the center of mass at which these forces act:

When the distance between the force-line and the center of mas