Ultimate Mattress Buying Guide ([year])
The Ultimate Mattress Buying Guide: How to Choose a Mattress by
Steven Asch
| Updated:
[date]

We receive free products to review and participate in affiliate programs, where we are compensated for items purchased through links from our site. See our disclosure page for more information.

Written by Steven Asch, Contributing Writer, CNC, CSNC, CWC, CPT

Steven Asch
Contributing Writer, CNC, CSNC, CWC, CPT

Steven has spent the last few years researching the ins and outs of mattresses. As an active athlete for many years, he understands the importance of a quality night’s sleep in maintaining a healthier life.

View Profile

Updated on [date]

Updated on [date]

Fact-Checked by Sosha Lewis, Certified Sleep Science Coach

Sosha Lewis
Certified Sleep Science Coach

After Sosha began writing sleep-related content, she knew she wanted to learn more about this important (yet often elusive!) aspect of human health and well-being. She became a Certified Sleep Science Coach to better understand what goes into getting a good night’s rest—including one’s choice of mattress. Sosha now calls upon this training when she tests and writes about beds and sleep accessories, and when she’s consulted for recommendations by publications such as Livingetc.

View Profile

Expert Contributor Dr. Raj Dasgupta, MD, FACP, FCCP, FAASM

Dr. Raj Dasgupta, MD, FACP, FCCP, FAASM

View Profile

Investing in a new mattress can seem overwhelming. The mattress industry has grown significantly, creating more choices than ever before. Not only are there many different types of mattresses to serve different body types and sleep positions , but there is also a range of innovative features and options to consider. It’s no surprise if you’re left wondering how to choose a mattress that will be best for you, and that’s where we come in to help. Our team at Mattress Clarity has tested over 500 mattresses and 150 sleep accessories since our start more than 7 years ago. In addition to following a detailed testing methodology , our team also receives guidance from medical experts such as Dr. Raj Dasgupta, our chief medical advisor, and Dr. Hannah Habeeb, our chief medical product tester. Adhering to these protocols allows us to offer unbiased, in-depth mattress reviews that have helped more than 43,000 people find a bed, with more than 6,600 sleepers using our insights to purchase a new mattress in [year] alone. So, if you’re tired of your current mattress but overwhelmed by all the choices out there, take a deep breath — because we have you covered with this omprehensive mattress-buying guide. [year] Mattress Trends
The mattress industry continues to modernize, offering new cooling features, eco-friendly construction, and generous dynamic pricing. Let’s take a look at some of the trends we’re following in [year]. Innovations in Cooling
Hot sleepers, or people who struggle to fall asleep feeling trapped in their own body heat, have an array of new mattresses available today to help keep them cool. Hybrid mattresses are becoming increasingly popular, allowing sleepers to enjoy the plush comfort of memory foam while benefiting from quality airflow and breathability from an airy coil layer. The foams atop this Leesa Sapira Chill Hybrid mattress retain less heat than traditional memory foams. Furthermore, mattress brands are treating fabrics to be more breathable, using phase-change materials that help dissipate body heat. For example, brands such as Brooklyn Bedding or Helix offer the GlacioTex cooling cover , which our testers find “cool to the touch” in our testing studio and a potentially great modern solution for dissipating body heat when resting on a bed. More and more brands are finding ways to keep sleepers cool without driving up their AC bills. If you’re a hot sleeper, consider checking out the top cooling mattresses available today. Eco-friendly Materials and Construction
Brands are increasingly using CertiPUR-US–certified foams, to the point where the certification is now a baseline expectation and not a bonus. Many beds are also much more eco-friendly, more hypoallergenic , and certified by reputable third-party organizations for their lack of emissions and other potentially unhealthy components. A layer of latex foam—derived from rubber trees instead of synthetic materials—inside a Saatva mattress. Manufacturers are also making environmentally-conscious strides without compromising quality. We tested some of the best organic mattresses on the market today and found excellent choices. Dynamic Discounts and Pricing
With the constantly growing online market, brands are always looking to outprice their competitors. Even luxury mattresses that give you a 5-star hotel sleeping experience are heavily discounted multiple times a year. Whether it’s Memorial Day, Black Friday, or the 4th of July, you may find mattresses within your budget that you never thought possible. A bed-in-a-box, or online mattress delivered to your home, has cut out the middleman markup across the industry. It’s important to research and frequently check for promotions on the mattress you’re eyeing, and not assume you just need to settle for the cheapest one. Best Mattresses of [year]
Below are our top mattress picks for [year] .
Nectar Classic Memory Foam Mattress – Best Mattress Overall Helix Midnight Luxe Mattress – Best Mattress for Back Pain DreamCloud Classic Hybrid – Best Hybrid Mattress
Saatva Classic – Best Firm Mattress
Leesa Sapira Chill Hybrid – Best Mattress for Back Sleepers WinkBed Plus Mattress – Best Mattress for Heavy People
Nolah Evolution Hybrid Mattress – Best Mattress for Side Sleepers Bear Elite Hybrid Mattress – Best Luxury Mattress
Brooklyn Bedding Aurora Luxe Mattress – Best Cooling Mattress Birch Luxe Natural Mattress – Best Organic Mattress

Highlights from the Best of the Best
Each mattress on our list is tested in our in-person testing studio by one of our sleep experts. Check out some of the highlights from those that are best in class. Nectar Mattress – Best Mattress Overall
This mattress offers the plush comfort of memory foam without compromising spinal support. When our tester, Livvi DiCicco, tried it out, she said, “Back sleeping felt like a breeze. The bed conforms to your lumbar area and fills in the space there, and it’s supportive enough to feel comfortable as it cushions.” Helix Midnight Luxe Mattress – Best Mattress for Back Pain The Helix Midnight is a hybrid mattress that combines foam and coils for balanced comfort and support. Our tester said, “It has a nice cozy, plush feel to it while still remaining supportive.” Leesa Sapira Chill Hybrid – Best Mattress for Back Sleepers This hybrid mattress is great for hot sleepers and heavier sleepers due to its versatile build. Our heavier (over 230 pounds) tester said this when they tried it out, “I feel equally supported on this mattress when I’m resting on my back or side. At the same time, it’s also cozy.” When to Buy a New Mattress
There are no hard or fast rules when it comes to swapping out a mattress. Durable mattresses made with high-quality materials will outlast cheaper ones, and the level of wear and tear a mattress undergoes will also be a factor in how long it lasts. Our chief medical advisor, Dr. Raj Dasgupta , gave us some signs to look for when it comes to buying a new mattress. “Although how a mattress feels is somewhat subjective, it’s important to pay attention how you feel when you wake up, especially if you’ve slept on it on a regular basis for seven years (or more).” Dr. Raj Dasgupta He also noted that noticeable sagging is a telltale indication that it is time to go mattress shopping. Video Guide On How To Choose a Mattress

What to Look for in a New Mattress
Once you’ve decided to replace your mattress, what should one expect from a new mattress and what is the best mattress? Here’s a list of things to think about before handing over the credit card for a new purchase Types of Mattresses
One of the first questions you’ll face when deciding on a new mattress is which type of mattress you want to buy. There are more mattress types available than ever before , and they each come with their own pros, cons, and distinct features. Here’s an overview of the different types of mattresses you’re likely to encounter in your quest for a new sleeping surface. Foam Mattresses
Foam mattresses have become increasingly popular. They allow for people to get a lot of good support and pressure relief without the “bouncy” feeling of a coil system. There are many types of foams to choose from , and they each offer different characteristics. Below are some of the most common options for foam mattresses. Memory Foam
Memory foam is made up of a material called viscoelastic polyurethane foam. Memory foam mattresses contour around the body and often allow sleepers to slowly sink into the mattress. Side sleepers often appreciate how these mattresses gently hug their joints, wh