Things we learned about LLMs in [year]

Simon Willison’s Weblog

Sponsored by: AWS — Move from SaaS to Agentic SaaS with resources for ISVs at every layer of the stack. Explore how AI for ISVs turns vision into results

Things we learned about LLMs in [year]

[date]

A lot has happened in the world of Large Language Models over the course of [year]. Here’s a review of things we figured out about the field in the past twelve months, plus my attempt at identifying key themes and pivotal moments.

This is a sequel to my review of [year] .

In this article:

The GPT-4 barrier was comprehensively broken

Some of those GPT-4 models run on my laptop

LLM prices crashed, thanks to competition and increased efficiency

Multimodal vision is common, audio and video are starting to emerge

Voice and live camera mode are science fiction come to life

Prompt driven app generation is a commodity already

Universal access to the best models lasted for just a few short months

“Agents” still haven’t really happened yet

Evals really matter

Apple Intelligence is bad, Apple’s MLX library is excellent

The rise of inference-scaling “reasoning” models

Was the best currently available LLM trained in China for less than $6m?

The environmental impact got better

The environmental impact got much, much worse

The year of slop

Synthetic training data works great

LLMs somehow got even harder to use

Knowledge is incredibly unevenly distributed

LLMs need better criticism

Everything tagged “llms” on my blog in [year]

The GPT-4 barrier was comprehensively broken

In my [date] review I wrote about how We don’t yet know how to build GPT-4 —OpenAI’s best model was almost a year old at that point, yet no other AI lab had produced anything better. What did OpenAI know that the rest of us didn’t?

I’m relieved that this has changed completely in the past twelve months. 18 organizations now have models on the Chatbot Arena Leaderboard that rank higher than the original GPT-4 from [date] ( GPT-4-0314 on the board)—70 models in total.

The earliest of those was Google’s Gemini 1.5 Pro , released in February. In addition to producing GPT-4 level outputs, it introduced several brand new capabilities to the field—most notably its 1 million (and then later 2 million) token input context length, and the ability to input video.

I wrote about this at the time in The killer app of Gemini Pro 1.5 is video , which earned me a short appearance as a talking head in the Google I/O opening keynote in May.

Gemini 1.5 Pro also illustrated one of the key themes of [year]: increased context lengths . Last year most models accepted 4,096 or 8,192 tokens, with the notable exception of Claude 2.1 which accepted 200,000 . Today every serious provider has a 100,000+ token model, and Google’s Gemini series accepts up to 2 million.

Longer inputs dramatically increase the scope of problems that can be solved with an LLM: you can now throw in an entire book and ask questions about its contents, but more importantly you can feed in a lot of example code to help the model correctly solve a coding problem. LLM use-cases that involve long inputs are far more interesting to me than short prompts that rely purely on the information already baked into the model weights. Many of my tools were built using this pattern.

Getting back to models that beat GPT-4: Anthropic’s Claude 3 series launched in March , and Claude 3 Opus quickly became my new favourite daily-driver. They upped the ante even more in June with the launch of Claude 3.5 Sonnet —a model that is still my favourite six months later (though it got a significant upgrade on October 22 , confusingly keeping the same 3.5 version number. Anthropic fans have since taken to calling it Claude 3.6).

Then there’s the rest. If you browse the Chatbot Arena leaderboard today—still the most useful single place to get a vibes-based evaluation of models—you’ll see that GPT-4-0314 has fallen to around 70th place. The 18 organizations with higher scoring models are Google, OpenAI, Alibaba, Anthropic, Meta, Reka AI, 01 AI, Amazon, Cohere, DeepSeek, Nvidia, Mistral, NexusFlow, Zhipu AI, xAI, AI21 Labs, Princeton and Tencent.

Training a GPT-4 beating model was a huge deal in [year]. In [year] it’s an achievement that isn’t even particularly notable, though I personally still celebrate any time a new organization joins that list.

Some of those GPT-4 models run on my laptop

My personal laptop is a 64GB M2 MacBook Pro from [year]. It’s a powerful machine, but it’s also nearly two years old now—and crucially it’s the same laptop I’ve been using ever since I first ran an LLM on my computer back in [date] (see Large language models are having their Stable Diffusion moment ).

That same laptop that could just about run a GPT-3-class model in March last year has now run multiple GPT-4 class models! Some of my notes on that:

Qwen2.5-Coder-32B is an LLM that can code well that runs on my Mac talks about Qwen2.5-Coder-32B in November—an Apache 2.0 licensed model!

I can now run a GPT-4 class model on my laptop talks about running Meta’s Llama 3.3 70B (released in December)

This remains astonishing to me. I thought a model with the capabilities and output quality of GPT-4 needed a datacenter class server with one or more $40,000+ GPUs.

These models take up enough of my 64GB of RAM that I don’t run them often—they don’t leave much room for anything else.

The fact that they run at all is a testament to the incredible training and inference performance gains that we’ve figured out over the past year. It turns out there was a lot of low-hanging fruit to be harvested in terms of model efficiency. I expect there’s still more to come.

Meta’s Llama 3.2 models deserve a special mention. They may not be GPT-4 class, but at 1B and 3B sizes they punch massively above their weight. I run Llama 3.2 3B on my iPhone using the free MLC Chat iOS app and it’s a shockingly capable model for its tiny (<2GB) size. Try firing it up and asking it for “a plot outline of a Netflix Christmas movie where a data journalist falls in love with a local ceramacist”. Here’s what I got, at a respectable 20 tokens per second:

Here’s the rest of the transcript . It’s bland and generic, but my phone can pitch bland and generic Christmas movies to Netflix now!

LLM prices crashed, thanks to competition and increased efficiency

The past twelve months have seen a dramatic collapse in the cost of running a prompt through the top tier hosted LLMs.

In [date] (here’s the Internet Archive for the OpenAI pricing page ) OpenAI were charging $30/million input tokens for GPT-4, $10/mTok for the then-new GPT-4 Turbo and $1/mTok for GPT-3.5 Turbo.

Today $30/mTok gets you OpenAI’s most expensive model, o1. GPT-4o is $2.50 (12x cheaper than GPT-4) and GPT-4o mini is $0.15/mTok—200x cheaper than GPT-4, nearly 7x cheaper than GPT-3.5 and massively more capable than that model.

Other model providers charge even less. Anthropic’s Claude 3 Haiku (from March, but still their cheapest model) is $0.25/mTok. Google’s Gemini 1.5 Flash is $0.075/mTok and their Gemini 1.5 Flash 8B is $0.0375/mTok—that’s 27x cheaper than GPT-3.5 Turbo last year.

I’ve been tracking these pricing changes under my llm-pricing tag .

These price drops are driven by two factors: increased competition and increased efficiency. The efficiency thing is really important for everyone who is concerned about the environmental impact of LLMs. These price drops tie directly to how much energy is being used for running prompts.

There’s still plenty to worry about with respect to the environmental impact of the great AI datacenter buildout, but a lot of the concerns over the energy cost of individual prompts are no longer credible.

Here’s a fun napkin calculation: how much would it cost to generate short descriptions of every one of the 68,000 photos in my personal photo library using Google’s Gemini 1.5 Flash 8B ( released in October ), their cheapest model?

Each photo would need 260 input tokens and around 100 output tokens.

260 * 68,000 = 17,680,000 input tokens

17,680,000 * $0.0375/million = $0.66

100 * 68,000 = 6,800,000 output tokens

6,800,000 * $0.15/million = $1.02

That’s a total cost of $1.68 to process 68,000 images. That’s so absurdly cheap I had to run the numbers three times to confirm I got it right.

How good are those descriptions? Here’s what I got from this command:

llm -m gemini-1.5-flash-8b-latest describe -a IMG_1825.jpeg

Against this photo of butterflies at the California Academy of Sciences:

A shallow dish, likely a hummingbird or butterfly feeder, is red. Pieces of orange slices of fruit are visible inside the dish.

Two butterflies are positioned in the feeder, one is a dark brown/black butterfly with white/cream-colored markings. The other is a large, brown butterfly with patterns of lighter brown, beige, and black markings, including prominent eye spots. The larger brown butterfly appears to be feeding on th