Systems design explains the world: volume 1

Je me souviens

Everything here is my opinion. I do not speak for your employer.

&larr; Thoughts you mightn't'a thunk about remote meetings

SimSWE 4: Wants, needs, and chasm-crossing &rarr;

[date] &raquo;

Systems design explains the world: volume 1

"Systems design" is a branch of study that tries to find universal architectural patterns that are valid across disciplines.

You might think that's not a possibility. Back in university, students used to tease the Systems Design Engineers, calling it "boxes and arrows" engineering. Not real engineering, you see, since it didn't touch anything tangible, like buildings, motors, hydrochloric acid, or, uh, electrons.

I don't think the Systems Design people took this criticism too seriously since everyone also knew that programme had the toughest admittance criteria in the whole university.

(A mechanical engineer told me they saw
electrical/computer engineers the same way: waveforms on a screen instead of real physical things that you could touch, change, and fix.)

I don't think any of us really understood what boxes-and-arrows engineering really was back then, but luckily for you, now I'm old. Let me tell you some stories.

What is systems design?

I started thinking more clearly about systems design when I was at a big tech company and helped people refine their self-promotion employee review packets. Most of it was straightforward, helping them map their accomplishments to the next step up the engineering ladder:

As a Novice going for Junior, you had to prove you could fix bugs without too much supervision;

Going for Senior, you had to prove you could implement a whole design with little supervision;

Going for Staff, you had to show you could produce designs based on business problems with basically no management;

Going for Senior Staff, you had to solve bigger and
bigger business problems; and so on.

After helping a few dozen people with their assessments, I noticed a trend. Most developers mapped well onto the ladder, but some didn't fit, even though they seemed like great engineers to me.

There were two groups of misfits:

People who maxed out as a senior engineer (building things) but didn't seem to want to, or be able to, make it to staff engineer (translating business problems).

People who were ranked at junior levels, but were better at translating business problems than at fixing bugs.

Group #1 was formally accounted for: the official word was most employees should never expect to get past Senior Engineer. That's why they called it Senior. It wasn't not much consolation to
people who wanted to earn more money or to keep improving for the next 20-30 years of a career, but it was something we could talk about.

(The book Radical
Candor by
Kim Scott has some discussion about how to handle great engineers who just want to build things. She suggests a separate progression for "rock solid" engineers, who want to become world-class experts at things they're great at, and "steep trajectory" engineers, who might have less attention to detail but who want to manage ever-bigger goals and jump around a lot.)

People in group #2 weren't supposed to exist. They were doing some hard jobs - translating business problems into designs - with great expertise, but these accomplishments weren't interesting to the junior-level promotion committees, who had been trained to look for "exactly one level up" attributes like deep technical knowledge in one or two specific areas, a history of rapid and numerous bug fixes, small independent launches, and so on. Meanwhile, their peers who couldn't (yet) architect their way out of a paper bag rose more quickly through the early ranks, because they wrote reams of code fast.

Tanya Reilly has an excellent talk (and transcribed slides) called Being Glue that perfectly captures this effect. In her
words: "Glue work is expected when you're senior... and risky when you're not."

What she calls glue work, I'm going to call systems design. They're two sides of the same issue. Humans are the most unruly systems of all, and yet, amazingly, they follow many of the same patterns as other systems.

People who are naturally excellent at glue work often stall out early in the prescribed engineering pipeline, even when they'd be great in later stages (staff engineers, directors, and executives) that traditional engineers struggle at. In fact, it's well documented that an executive in a tech company requires almost a totally different skill set than a programmer, and rising through the ranks doesn't prepare you for that job at all. Many big tech companies hire executives from outside the company, and sometimes even from outside their own industry, for that reason.

...but I guess I still haven't answered the question. What is systems design? It's the thing that will eventually kill your project if you do it wrong, but probably not right away. It's macroeconomics instead of microeconomics. It's fixing which promotion ladders your company even has, rather than trying to climb the ladders. It's knowing when a distributed system is or isn't appropriate, not just knowing how to build one. It's repairing the incentives in a political system, not just getting elected and passing your favourite laws.

Most of all, systems design is invisible to people who don't know how to look for it . At least with code, you can measure output by the line or the bug, and you can hire more programmers to get more code. With systems design, the key insight might be a one-sentence explanation given at the right time to the right person, that affects the next 5 years of work, or is the difference between hypergrowth and steady growth.

Sorry, I don't know how to explain it better than that. What I can do instead is talk about some systems design problems and archetypes that repeat, over and over, across multiple fields. If you can recognize these archetypes, and handle them before they kill your project, you're on your way to being a systems designer.

Systems of control: hierarchies and decentralization

Let's start with an obvious one: the problem of centralized vs distributed control structures. If I ask you what's a
better org structure: a command-and-control hierarchy or a flat organization, most people have been indoctrinated to say the latter. Similarly if I ask whether you should have an old crusty centralized database or a fancy distributed database, everyone wants to build the latter. If you're an SRE and we start talking about pets and cattle, you always vote for cattle. You'd laugh at me if I suggested using anything but a distributed software version control system (ie. git). The future of money, I've heard, is distributed decentralized cryptocurrency. If you want to defeat censorship, you need a distributed social network. The trend is clear. What's to debate?

Well, real structures are more complicated than that. The best introductory article I know on this topic is Jo
Freeman's The Tyranny of
Structurelessness , which
includes the famous quote: "This apparent lack of structure too often disguised an informal, unacknowledged and unaccountable leadership that was all the more pernicious because its very existence was denied."

"Informal, unacknowledged, and unaccountable" control is just as common in distributed computing systems as it is in human social systems.

The truth is, nearly every attempt to design a hierarchy-free, "flat" control system just moves the central control around until you can't see it anymore. Human structures all have leaders, whether implicit or explicit, and the explicit ones tend to be more diverse.

The web depends on centrally
controlled DNS and centrally approved TLS certificate issuers; the global Internet depends on
a small cabal who sorts out routing
problems .
Every blockchain depends on whoever decides if your preferred chain will fork this week, and whoever runs the popular exchanges, and whoever decides whether to arrest those people. Distributed radio networks depend on centralized government spectrum licenses. Democracy depends on someone enforcing your right to vote. Capitalism depends on someone enforcing the rules of a "free" marketplace.

At my first startup, we tried to run the development team as a flat organization, where everyone's opinions were listened to and everyone could debate the best way to do something. The overall consensus was that we mostly succeeded. But I was shocked when one of my co-workers said to me afterward: "Our team felt flat and egalitarian. But you can't ever forget that it was only that way because you forced it to be that way."

Truly distributed systems do exist. Earth's ecosystem is perhaps one (although it's becoming increasingly fragile and dependent on humans not to break it). Truly distributed databases using Raft
consensus or similar
algorithms certainly exist and work.
Distributed version control (like git) really is distributed, although we ironica